I've done this now over half a century.
I was part of building bakery cafes in
America between old bone pen, Panera.
These were the dominant brands. How do
you develop the long-term thinking that
you've brought to all these different
concepts? I have an expression. I'm
long-term greedy, not short-term stupid.
Now, it seems so obvious, but how did
you hit on this insight at the time? I
think that the most powerful skill that
I have as a business person and what I
would challenge entrepreneurs to acquire
is the skill of talk to me about the
difficulties of running a business. The
family cost, the social cost when you're
doing anything that's takes powerful
commitment. That commitment owns you.
You don't own it. There's a very real
personal price. I've been married twice.
It's not something I'm proud of.
Everything I believe in about business
starts with three words.
What are you obsessed with lately? My
health, actually. What does that mean
for you to be obsessed with that? Well,
I'm 71 and I look at my kids. I look at
my relationships and there's so much to
live for and so much to see and I really
want to do everything I can to give
myself every opportunity to live and see
how the world unfolds.
>> And how has that changed your behaviors?
I got more serious about it because I
would say in my earlier years, 30s, 40s,
and 50s,
I was probably more focused on work and
relationships, family, and as I gained
perspective on it, if I'm ever going to
do it, now's the time. So, I'm trying to
literally work out every day in some
serious way and really eat well, take
the right medication, supplements,
anything I can to help myself. Uh, but
to me, that's about an attitude towards
life. And that attitude essentially
starts with a view um that it's our
responsibility to figure out what it is
that we're going to respect in the
future. I tell it by way of a story. My
I watched my mom and dad pass away now
30 odd years ago. One of them died very
much at peace, the other not so much at
peace. And they really were
secondguessing some of the decisions
they've made in their lives. And I began
to realize there's a judgment day. I
can't tell you, Shane, it's up there.
That's a personal spiritual decision.
But I can tell you if you if you have a
chronic illness and you have the
opportunity, you have a judgment day, a
self judgment as you go through the uh
the end of life. And watching them die
30 years ago, I concluded for me, I
wanted that opportunity to have that
judgment day, not in the ninth inning
with two outs, but in the seventh
inning, the fifth inning, the third
inning when I could really do something
about it. And ever since I began on an
annual basis sitting down and saying
what is it in five years and 10 years uh
I'm going to respect in the context of
my relationships with my work my
relationships with my family and friends
my relationships with my body and my own
relationships with my my own
spirituality.
And so that process of defining what
I'll respect is where I began. And I
would then on a basically um codify
those initiatives, those things I was
trying to accomplish. I'd codify them
into projects and then literally sit
down with myself once a quarter and say,
"How am I doing? Am I actually full of
baloney or or not? Am I actually getting
done what I signed up to do?" And so
increasingly over time, bring it back, I
have found myself realizing that I have
to do a better job of caring for my
body. And that the power of exercise,
the power of physical engagement really
matters. And I think I feel better about
that relationship today than probably at
any other point in my life. Take me
through one of those quarterly reviews.
What does that look like to you? Do you
like pull up your calendar and look at
how you're spending your time? to you.
Yes, we look at time, but it's not so
much about time. Time is a is a means.
It's not the the end. Uh I'm really
looking at what did I get done? Did I
get done the things that I said I needed
to do to create that condition that I'm
trying to attain in three, five, and 10
years. So, I give you a very specific
example, and we're staying in the health
domain. I think it was probably 15 years
ago. I went to my doctor and I realized
I was on the edge of becoming
pre-diabetic.
Uh I was also doing work at Panera and I
had a medical adviser helping me deal
with how our food manifested itself and
we wanted to really serve people. We had
done a clean food initiative and he put
me on a continuous glucose monitor and
he wanted me to see how I was effective
at Panera food and and that whole
experience between my doctor and this
work I was doing at Panera made me
realize I needed to manage my own
relationship with carbohydrates, my own
relationship with my diet. And that led
me to say, hey, if you're ever going to
do this, I was at that time, you know,
mid50s. I said, if I'm ever going to do
that, I got to get to work on doing it.
And I then put that into projects. One
of which was uh in my case to to move to
a more vegan diet. Another piece of that
was to hire a trainer. and I hired a
Ukrainian uh former Olympic trainer,
track and field coach who uh would come
to my house at 5:30 in the morning and
did so for for 12 years. And so what I'm
really saying is I'm trying to no nobody
knows where we're going to end up, but
I'm trying to create a state and then
the question is what are the projects
the things I can do to do that? And then
to sit down and say every quarter, how
am I doing against that? So now we're 15
years later. I still wear that
continuous glucose monitor. My blood
sugar is you know low normal. Um but
it's a way in which I I I keep the data
and I've I I've become educated. It's a
it's an ongoing project. Um same thing
now with exercise. I have a different
trainer. Um, I've evolved, but I'm
really trying hard now to push up my V2
max as opposed to
simply my my my strength and I'm playing
with a bunch of different things. But
but again, all of these are project
against an end of trying to to recognize
it's my responsibility to care for
myself and nobody knows how this is all
going to play out and whether I will
remain healthy or not or any of us will.
But I can do what I can do. And on a
regular basis, I'm sitting there and I'm
I'm literally writing it down. I'm
really saying, "This is where I'm trying
to get to." And then I am literally
writing it down. It's controversial when
I talk to people about exercising every
day. People are like, "You're crazy. You
need rest." And I'm like, "It's easier
to exercise every day than it is five
days a week for me anyway."
>> Yeah. I'm committed to it every day. And
in fact, what I did, again, part of that
project is I I set an appointment for 8
am every day. And I either do it with a
trainer or myself, but I'm there 8:00
a.m. and I get it done before the day
begins, basically.
>> Yeah.
>> And and you know, I' I've started to be
a little more um kind to myself. I'm not
doing at 5:30 a.m. anymore, but I still
I want to get it done before the day
starts because if it's really important,
it's one of the key things I'm trying to
drive and it's one of the projects I'm
focused on, then I have to make sure I
make time. With the wisdom that you have
now, looking back and and building Oon
Pan, Panera, which I want to get into in
detail, do you wish you would have
placed more of an emphasis on your
health back then? Yes, but I have to put
that in context as well. Look at I'm 71.
I couldn't feel more blessed. I've had
uh an amazing life. I've had great
health. I'm still in the prime of my
life. Uh I have extraordinary family. I
I I've had um the chance to do really
interesting work and impact hundreds of
thousands, if not millions of of people.
I've been able to engage my mind. I've
had this opportunity
to live a blessed life. I look backwards
and there are certainly lessons I've
learned and things I might do
differently, but taken as a whole, I
couldn't be more at peace and more
pleased. Does it change how you think
about sort of food and the experience
that you're creating for people in the
restaurant? Like I think of something
like True Food Kitchen, which is a very
healthconscious sort of restaurant. How
how does it change how you think about
serving millions of Americans every day?
I've always come from a place of wanting
to make a difference in people's lives.
My way of approaching the world was
essentially initially in a political
context and I discovered through some
experiences in university and we can
talk about these but but I discovered
that business is probably one of the
most creative things you can ever do and
for a a kid who couldn't dance and
couldn't sing I was I was blown away by
the power of business both the
creativity of it and it is a lever to
change. I think I've been involved in
more change as a business person, more
positive change for the world than I
ever could have been if I had done
politics or gone into government or been
a lawyer. I mean, you take Panera.
Panera was one of the two first brands
to introduce antibiotic free chicken in
America. It led to changing the
marketplaces, the Challenger brand, and
doing so, we actually opened up the
market, lowered the prices, and in came,
you know, everybody from McDonald's to
Chick-fil-A. We were the among the first
people to remove trans fats um from our
menu. Um in in the early 2010, 2012, the
US government wanted to post caloric
information. Um the industry was
fighting it intensely publicly said look
at you know what what's the problem with
this industry if people are afraid of of
posting caloric information what's in
their food maybe the answer isn't trying
to hide it maybe the answer is to
actually change what you got in your
food if you think people aren't going to
be too pleased with that. we were in the
lead uh and and had the opportunity to
be one of the first large organizations
to remove all artificial colors,
flavors, sweeteners, preservatives,
really to to push for what is now called
clean food. Uh removing the ultra
processing and I I I know that we've
made a difference. Um I also think we
made a difference in in in in the food
culture. When I grew up, the only
choices were fast food and fine dining.
In the early 90s, as I think you and
maybe some of your listeners know, we
really
developed the ideology that became what
is called today fast casual. Wasn't very
complicated. We we we began to to look
around and could see this been 92 93
that one out of three consumers, one out
of four consumers held their noses when
they went into fast food.
>> And you said, "What is it that they're
looking for?" And I know we spent a year
or two on the road listening to people.
And what you heard was that so many of
these consumers, what they really sought
was real food, environments that engaged
them, served by people that that cared,
and they actually wanted an experience
that elevated their sense of self, not
depleted it, which is what they
experienced in fast food. And we began
to say if we could create that kind of
environment
um that we we could create something
that that actually elevated people and
that this was a powerful opportunity.
Now I was trying to figure it out for my
own company but that ideology that view
of the world which in the early 90s
nobody thought would ever work that
became the ideology that fueled what's
called fast casual today which is a $350
billion business. Um, Panera became the
poster child for it. Uh, Howard Schultz,
Starbucks played a similar kind of um,
paradigm. Steve Ell's and Chipotle. And
I think together you saw the the
evolution of food culture. I'm I'm so
pleased. One of the things that we did
was just say food was about so much more
than what you put in your stomach and
how cheap it was. Food industry is the
second oldest profession and it's about
hospitality at its core. You know, the
idea that we could create environments
that people actually wanted to sit in
and invite them to to come in and enjoy
it and to find it as a place where you
where you really did want to have an
interview, gather the soccer moms, have
a Bible study group, write the great
American novel. I mean, all of these
were experiences that played out in
environments that we created. And to me,
that was a a beautiful contribution to
people's lives.
If you're a founder, you know naming
your startup takes forever. You finally
land on the perfect name only to find
out that Peter from Delaware got to
the.com first. So, you're stuck with two
bad options. Pay up and fund Peter's
retirement or tack on random words until
your domain looks like a Wi-Fi password.
But after all the time and money spent
on naming, you don't want that. And
thanks to tech domains, you don't have
to. Withte, you get the name you
actually want. It's clean, sharp, no
compromises. It instantly tells
investors and customers that you're
building technology. CES.te, the world's
biggest consumer tech event, uses tech
domain. So does 1x.te
and OpenAI backed startup along with
hundreds of thousands of tech companies
worldwide. So don't waste another minute
negotiating. Go to GoDaddy, Namecheep,
Cloudflare, or wherever you buy your
domains and get your tech domain today.
The holidays are here. If you're
searching for a truly meaningful gift
for someone you care about or maybe for
yourself, I might just have the perfect
idea. Meet Remarkable, the paper tablet.
We're all glued to screens that demand
our constant attention. But Remarkable
is a different kind of screen. It's an
elegantly designed, distraction-free
paper tablet built to help you think
better and focus deeper. It has the
simplicity and feel of writing on paper,
but with the power of technology like
organizing all your notes and ideas into
one place and even converting your
handwriting into type text. With
Remarkable, there are no apps, no social
media, and no notifications, just pure
uninterrupted focus. Choose the device
that fits your needs. the original black
and white remarkable 2, the advanced
color display of Remarkable Paper Pro,
or the new portable Remarkable Paper Pro
Move. This holiday season, give the gift
of being present. Give the gift of
focus. Find the perfect distractionfree
paper tablet at remarkable.com.
It's remarkable. I mean, looking back
now, it seems so obvious, but how did
you hit on this insight at the time? I
think that the most powerful skill that
I have as a business person and what I
would challenge entrepreneurs to acquire
is the skill of empathy. Empathy is
about the ability to climb into somebody
else's brain to feel what they're
feeling and to see what they're feeling
and not sell them but understand and
appreciate them. And I think that
historically we've had those kinds of
skills. I mean, you know, when you talk
about my career, you talk about often
the financial results. You have Cava,
which has been the most successful food
service IPO of the last 5 years,
arguably. Now, a company worth $7
billion, was worth as much as 15
billion, but it's up three, fourfold
from its IPO year and a half ago. Um,
you talk about Panera. Panera was the
best performing restaurant stock over
two decades. Its last two decades um
produced 25% irr
uh in fact somebody told me we we
actually beat Warren Buffett and
Berkshire Hathaway. You you know people
talk about the financial performance but
that's not the part that gets me
excited. That's not the part that I
actually feel. That's a byproduct or
manifestation of what really was
exciting which is learning and
transforming. And so over the course of
our history and I can I can take you
through this but there were three or
four maybe five key learnings that broke
maybe every five years that led to
massive transformation. And it was
actually getting that and figuring it
out and seeing it and tasting it that I
loved. Um, that to me was where the real
work was to to understand that with
empathy what the opportunity was and
then to have the the the discipline to
go in not just understand it but
actually build that into an organization
and put that in place and we can go all
the way back to the initiation of my
career. I started it with a single
cookie store in downtown Boston. That
cookie store led to um an opportunity to
become involved in another company
called Oon Pen. Essentially, there were
50,000 people a day walking by that
store.
>> The cookie store.
>> The cookie store. Nobody bought cookies
before 12 noon. So, we made a decision
um to put in French baked goods. We
became a ly of this company called Oon
Pan. I didn't know at that time but Oon
Pen was really a French bread
manufacturer. Um they had opened 13
stores and closed 10 of them had about
three million in debt and were
functionally bankrupt. And uh I became
their ly in this one square block area
in downtown Boston. And I I can tell you
as an operator I know which of my
vendors are any good and which aren't.
They were so out of control. Sometimes
they build me, sometimes they didn't.
Sometimes they delivered, sometimes they
didn't. I'm sure to this day I still owe
money. But the point of the story is
simply to say they had a lot of issues.
I saw the opportunity to apply what I'd
learned in the cookie business to the
French bakery business and it led to a
merger. Uh we took 60% of the company
and they kept 40% and then split it up.
That company Oonen Coinc, which we
formed was my cookie store and there are
three French bakeries was the company we
ended up literally selling for $7.8 8
billion in 2017. But the point of the
story is the first thing that we
actually really figured out was the
possibility, the opportunity of what Oon
Pent represented. And I would be working
on the counter and customers would walk
in and say, "I want that baguette." And
I'd say, "Sure." And they'd say, "Slice
it." I start to slice it. You know how
you slice bread? You slice it like this.
And they say, "No, slice it from top to
bottom." I'd do so. and I'd hand them
the the baguette chain and they'd pull
out a little bag from a supermarket and
they they put some boron and roast beef
on or smoked turkey and again you didn't
have to be a marketing wiz to say wait a
second what they really care about the
job they want is a sandwich they want
something it's not the bread they want
itself it's how that forms a platform
for something else and we began to say
maybe the opportunity The job we wanted
they that the customer wanted to hire us
for was actually to make him the
sandwich, make him the salad, use the
croissant bread as a platform.
And straight up um again doesn't seem
like a a revelation now, but we began to
rebuild this concept around that idea.
And very quickly this broken bankrupt
company, Old Bone Pen, started taking
off. And when we were selling sandwiches
and and and croissant, it was an
elevated food experience. People loved
it. And this broken down little company
in the course of six, eight years took
off. Uh it became a uh category in malls
across North America. We had everybody
from Pepsi and Sarah Lee um attempt to
take us on or buy us out or take it take
us out. By 1991, the manifestation of
that was we went public based on this
this model of a French bakery cafe as
opposed to just a French bakery. That
was one learning that that that
observation that empathetic observation
of the power of of the product not as an
end in and of itself but as a platform
that led to a powerfully successful
concept. The same thing happened again
by 93. Oon pen was beginning to run out
of organic growth and the one thing if
you're in a public company and I've been
involved in any number of public
companies most of its valuation is
generated by its possibility of growth
and you have to actually deliver that
and it was very clear to me in the early
90s that Obam was limited in its growth.
It was great in Boston, New York, DC,
Chicago, but it didn't work in the malls
in LA. It didn't work in the malls in in
Missouri. And we ended up backward
integrating and we ended up building a
big international business. We said if
we're the best in the United States at
high density urban feeding, there's more
opportunities abroad than just the
United States. We also began building a
manufacturing business. We had uh had
always had manufacturing skills and
built what was the at that time the
largest frozen dough plant ever built in
the the Midwest. And then I I ended up
buying um a little 19story chain in St.
Louis called the St. Louis Bread
Company. And I saw that again at that
time as a a gateway to the suburban
marketplace. Old Bumpen would be urban.
Uh the St. Louis Bread Company could be
suburban. And and and it was
interesting. And it was at that point,
this would have been 93, 94, 95, I I ran
it through an earnout, I I began
traveling the country with guy named
Scott Davis, another guy named Dwight
Juen. These were uh people that worked
with me, colleagues who I thought, you
know, I learned from. And we began
seeing these consumers who wanted
something more. And it was very clear
that there was this very distinct
consumer niche out there that wanted
something better. And we began to to try
to make sense of it. And again, you ask
me how we did it. It was traveling into
the west coast, the east coast, went up
to Vancouver in Canada, Mikey and Terra
breads, amazing bread he was doing up
there. And we're trying to find out who
are the best people um that were meeting
customer needs and why were people
smiling when they came out of there. And
it was from that that we essentially
began to get it. And I can I can I can
remember um sitting in a in a bar with
these two guys, Scott Davis and Dwight
Juice. And and Dwight was my researcher.
And Dwight said, "You know, you really
want to understand today's consumer?
Look at their beer bottle. That label on
it is a mirror for who people perceive
themselves to be. And our opportunity is
for our food to do the same thing, to
give people a sense of who they were and
what they are. And you know, I began to
to make sense of it. And again, for me,
the the the the powerful theme here of
shame is trying to search for what is
the the signal versus the noise. um you
know what really matters because there's
all this stuff coming at you but what
are the deeper trends and what had
become clear to me as I was traveling
the country and watching people and
their angst around fast food their need
for speed but their need for quality
their need for an experience that
elevated them as I was doing that I
began to understand a deeper theme post
World War II all food was local but you
fast forward that In 1990, almost every
major consumer category had been
commodified. It had been turned into an
oligopoly. You can take beer. It had all
once been local beer. It was Annheiser
Bush and Miller. You can take coffee. It
was also again once local coffee
roasters that had morphed into um
fulures and and and Maxwell House. You
can take um soft drinks. once had been
local soft drink manufacturers that had
become Coke and Pepsi and every action
draws reaction and that's the deeper
trend and we began to see in different
consumer categories people waking up and
saying you know I don't want to be part
of a mass market I want to feel special
in a world in which I don't and you
started to see the development of craft
breweries and beer good friend of mine
in Boston Jim uh Cook um did Samuel
Adams
uh you know it was an answer to what um
had happened to the marketplace. We saw
the same thing with coffee with the
growth of specialty coffee. I mean back
then if you came to my house for dinner
on Friday night I'd serve you folders.
Today if I don't use a you know an
expensive espresso machine I'm or an
espresso I'm somehow insulting you. That
was the deeper trend. People wanted to
feel special. You saw the same thing
with beverages. Coke and Pepsi morphed
into Snapple into Al Waldo and now you
walk into a convenience store, you're
going to see a couple hundred different
beverage brands. The point of it is we
saw the same thing, the same opportunity
happening in food. At one time, all food
had been local and had been commoditized
into fast food. And the powerful
opportunity was for specialty food, for
food that was done the way it had been
done, for food that people respected
with ingredients. And we began to see
the power of that and saw the same thing
happening with bakery. One time bakery
had all been local in the consolidation,
the commodification that had become
three lows for 99. And by the early '9s,
some consumers were waking up and
saying, "I want it done the way my
grandparents did it. no chemicals, no
preservatives, stone deck ovens. And we
began to say, there's a powerful
opportunity in, shall we say, specialty
food, and there's no more powerful
platform to compete with that than a
specialty bakery. And putting those two
together became our manifestation of
what we could do as now called fast
casual concept. And so again, same
thing. I saw it, I could see it, I could
taste it. And it was the opportunity to
go put that in place. We should come
back to what the objective of all this
is in a second. But that led to that
second transformation. And the second
transformation ultimately was to apply
those principles of a specialty food to
one of our concepts. And I began to
apply it to this one concept we held
called St. Louis Break Company. And we
literally completely rebuilt it. We took
that unit that was doing about a million
dollars a year. It was basically a a a
sandwich place in which the bread was
the differentiator. And we added a
breakfast business ruden and sourdough
bagels. And the business popped from a
million to a million250. And then we
came in and created a whole different
environment for the store. A place that
you wanted to sit. a wonderful wonderful
designer named Terry Heckler who
actually did our logo and did the
original Starbucks logo out of out of
Seattle who's since passed away but but
he was instrumental in that and we
created a kind of environment that
welcomed you and invited you. I used to
call it visual candy. Wherever you sat,
you you saw something and we we we we
softened the environment. We made it
comfortable. We made it a place you
wanted to be and we put that into place
into our stores. Very quickly our
volumes popped from a million250 up to a
million750. And we began to understand
that we were actually playing in another
business, a gathering place business
offering an opportunity for a place
people could go to to touch base, to see
each other, to connect. Soccer moms,
Bible groups, pharma reps, folks doing
interviews, people doing their taxes.
And we created these environments. And
again, this is the manifestation of this
understanding that people wanted to feel
special in a world in which they didn't.
And Panera became the poster child for
that. And we built that out. And that
led to a third learning and
transformation. By 989,
I was feeling some real frustration. I
was running a big public company. We had
four divisions at that time. Oon Pen
Ompen Manufacturing, Oon Pen
International, and this fourth division,
St. Louis Bread Company, that we had
renamed Panera. That's a whole another
story why we did it. But it was renamed
Panera Bread. And I'm on a beach down in
the Caribbean with a friend. And I'm
lamenting this friend. You know,
everybody's fighting. Everybody's angry
at me. The guys at Oon Pen are angry at
me. Why am I trying to take their
capital and shift it to this growth
thing Panera? The guys in international
didn't want to call home and the guys in
manufacturer were trying to figure out
why they were in a retail company. Any
rate, we had professional managers and
everyone and and I was I said this
strange you know the real the real shame
here this thing Panera even though it's
the third biggest of our company it's
not the largest. It's not the name on
the door. The name of the door was OM
that was the public company. I said,
'This thing has the potential to be a
nationally dominant company. For every
thousand people say it, one ever makes
it. And it was pretty clear that we we
had that opportunity. And I said, you
know what? We're going to screw it up.
We're not going to give it the capital.
We're not going to give it the human
resources to get it where it needs to
go. And my friend looked at me and said,
"Ron, what would you do if the name of
the company was Panera? Panera owned
everything else. How would that change
the way you thought?" And I looked at my
friend, I said, 'Wow, I'd never thought
of it that way. If I had any guts, if I
had if it was really Panera, I would
monetize every other asset, take the
financial capital, and I'd also take the
human capital, the best people, and I'd
go down there and I'd make this happen
because the greatest gem in this company
was that division. And the greatest risk
to to its possibility, its potential,
was that we didn't give it what it
needed to actually grow and become what
it could be. You know, I thought about
I'm this kind of guy if I say I'm going
to do it, I often go do it. I want to
live with myself. And I went off and and
and came back two months later and went
to my board with a proposal to sell
every other business and bet the whole
thing on this Panera Bread division. you
know, I didn't control the company at
that point and that was a definitely a
very tough situation, but ultimately um
they gave me the room to do it. I did
it. It led to the worst year and a half
of my life. I sold every other division.
Um these aren't just businesses. These
were, you know, the old bone pen was my
first child. My kids know that, you
know, I mean, it was a part of me. These
were people I had sweated with and bled
with and I loved. The good news is most
of them ultimately came back to work for
us when their non-competes were over.
But we sold the you know Oonen in Oon
Pen International. We sold the
manufacturing business and by 99 I ended
up with Panera Bread and a whole bunch
of cash and and a business that had
extraordinary potential. And then I went
to work to help make that happen. And we
took it from what a couple of hundred
stores up to 2,000 restaurants. We're
very close to it by the end of that
decade. And that led again to the the
the next transformation cuz they they
come in waves. And by 2008
2009, I personally was feeling that I
wanted transformation. I wanted to
understand if I could take these
powerful lessons I learned about
long-term thinking and actually apply
them in a a broader civic society. I had
been involved with the Obama campaign
and there had been some discussion of of
joining the administration and I was
unable to give him my commitment to
Panera and I decided I wanted to go do
this in some way and I also had a a
desire to test out an idea I had been
working on which was something called
Panera Cares cafes of shared
responsibility where there would be no
set prices. It was a test of humanity.
people come in and it's another whole
story. But I wanted to test out these
these cafes of shared responsibility.
And so in 2008 2009 I stepped down as
CEO. I tried to take that opportunity as
jumping off a high dive board to
actually learn what it felt to go in the
water and I spent about a year a year
and a half um creating Panera Cares
doing a bunch of political things. I was
one of the eight or nine people that
co-founded a group called No Labels here
in the United States, which is meant to
reduce the hyperartisanship in DC, the
polarization, and focus us on long-term
thinking. Again, you it's about seeing
opportunity. I had the chance to to
return um from the West Coast. I was
still the executive chairman of Panera
and the largest shareholder and I did a
lot of the M&A work and some of the
consumer work and I came back from a
trip after a weekend and I essentially
decided I wanted to write a a manifesto
for how I would I would compete with
Panera if I weren't part of Panera. I
would say how I would screw with Panera,
but but how would you take it on? How
would you best it? And I essentially at
that time called for for complete
digital access which didn't exist in the
restaurant industry. We can talk more
about that. I called for something
called loyalty which again didn't exist.
It's become prevalent in the industry.
Uh it had actually been developed in the
UK with a company called Tesco and came
through Kroger in the United States
where your best customers were treated
different differently. I called for
clean food, a different approach to
eating and how you might eat. And I
essentially called for omni channel and
I I I handed in this vision um for a
radical transformation of Panera to Bill
Morton who' become the CEO. And Bill was
my very dear friend, 20-year colleague,
and looked at me and said, "Wow." He
said, "I don't have anybody to work on
this. Would you go work on it?" And I
said, "Yeah, I'll have some fun with
it." And $25 million later in another
year, the the the executive chairman is
working 80 hours a week on this vision
for how to have integrated technology
changed the guest experience. Changed
the the whole deal. I was loving it. I
had none of the ceremonial duties of
being a CEO. I didn't have to tell
people what I just did. I don't have to
tell them what I was going to do. I just
was dealing with the product. And um
Bill came to me and said he personally
had a problem. He couldn't travel.
something had happened in his family and
he said maybe we should make you CEO
again and I should step down and we
debated it because it wasn't what I
wanted necessarily but it seemed to be
necessary at a certain point and maybe
nine months or a year later we we
executed that we just swapped positions
he became executive vice chairman and I
became a CEO again and I put this in
place and again it it all sounds lovely
but it led to the worst three years I
can ever imagine. I had activist
investors attack me. I spent $150
million on technology. I used to refer
to technology as a social security of an
era. It was only a matter of time till
it was 100% of our revenue. I that was
we were really investing in it and you
didn't know where it would end and we tr
ended up having to transform everything.
We transformed not just technology but
we transformed how we how we dealt with
the guest what our our our concept
essence was. Um we transformed much of
the senior management team this company
had had grown and its needs and its
requirements. Ultimately this became one
of the mo largest transformations in the
industry and it took on a life of its
own. And again, straight up, I could see
the opportunity for a better Panera that
was not competing the way it had
competed for the prior 20 years, but was
competing against what the possibility
was of what the consumer wanted. And
then came the hard work of actually
putting that into existence. And by
2017, it was working. Our arid was up
35%. Our comtore sales were were pushing
double digits. And we had a European
money manager uh JB who came along and
fell in love with Panera and they wanted
to buy it. And though I was never
selling it, it wasn't my intention. Uh
you know, when somebody falls in love,
who is it for me to deny them what they
wanted if they were willing to pay for
it? And they they paid for it. And what
at that time was the largest or second
largest US restaurant deal ever done,
$7.8 billion. at among the highest
multiples. And you know, again, it
seemed like an opportunity to harvest
everything that we had worked on for a
lot of people that had believed in us.
And we we took that opportunity.
You know, people talk a lot about
product market fit, sales tactics or
pricing strategy. But the truth is
success in selling often comes down to
something much simpler, the system
behind the sale. That's why I use and
love Shopay because nobody does selling
better than Shopify. They've built the
number one checkout on the planet. And
with Shopay, businesses see up to 50%
higher conversions. That's not a
rounding error. That's a game changer.
Attention is scarce. Shopify helps you
capture it and convert it. If you're
building a serious business, your
commerce platform needs to meet your
customers wherever they are. On your
site, in store, in their feed, or right
inside their inbox. The less they think,
the more they buy. Businesses that sell
more, sell on Shopify. If you're serious
about selling, the tech behind the
scenes matters as much as the product.
Upgrade your business and get the same
checkout that I use. Sign up for your $1
per month trial period at
shopify.com/nowledged
project. All lowercase. Go to
shopify.com/nowledge
project. Upgrade your selling today.
Shopify.com/nowledge
project.
And then what are the major clicks to
get us to Cavana? Now, you know, it's
interesting. So, I I I left Panera. I
had always had interest in a number of
other little businesses and I was doing
after I left I was doing a lot of
speaking on the pervasive short-termism
in the US capital markets and how not
just our pol our body politic but our
capital markets and how that was
essentially making us less competitive.
It was it was not helping our GDP
growth. If we're not thinking long term
we're not going to have innovation. If
all we want is is to pop the stock, it's
short-term cost cutting that drives it.
One of my my associates, a guy named Kee
Pasco. Oh, I had worked with me at
Panera said, "Why don't you take your
own money and put your money where your
mouth is?" And I ultimately took roughly
$200 million of my own money. No LPs, no
external folks, just my own money and a
bit of money from some of my partners.
um some of the people that chose to join
us and took some of the people I had
worked with and decided to go do it and
essentially I created a investment
vehicle because it's not a firm it's
called act three you can figure out
where that comes from oon pan panera and
now act 3 holdings and within eight
weeks of of of leaving Panera had gotten
involved in our first really real deal
which was Cava I had been an investor in
Cava uh uh when it was two restaurants,
just a little something. And after I
left Panera, they asked me if I joined
their board. Another company called
Zoies had asked me if I joined their
board. Uh they were a public company and
you know, and it was very clear to me
again, I could see and taste that
opportunity. Mediterranean had power. It
was the number one diet in America. It
was bold flavors. It was different but
accessible. And you could tell this was
a a powerful channel with lots of winds
at its back the channel. And I began to
say who has the potential to dominate?
Is it Zoe's or Kava? And again, these
folks at Zoies were were five times the
size of Cava, but Cava was doing higher
volumes and was a better concept. I
started to think to myself, you know
what? What I should do is buy the Zoies.
I think it was a three or400 million
dollar public company at that point from
a billion dollars, you know, instead of
figuring out for them buy it and then
merge it in with Cava. And the one
problem is I had to tell that to Cava
who wanted me to join their board. And I
I broke the news to Brett Schulman, who
is the this wonderful CEO down at Cava.
And Brett said, "Wow, okay, that's an
interesting idea." And he said, "Before
you join the board, maybe you want to
tell them about this." And I I went and
basically pitched their board on this
idea. And in their wisdom, I must be be
straight, they understood it and they
understood the power of building a a
dominant brand in the Mediterranean
category. And um it helped that I agreed
to essentially finance um a large part
of the acquisition and to to help lead
it. But what it amounted to was instead
of me buying Zoe's, we decided to have
Cava buy Zoe's and then we would help
them make that transformation. And here
was the bet that by buying a company
five times larger, we could apply our
discipline, our skills, our culinary
skills um to end up with the dominant
player in this category. And the the
thesis um step back, but the thesis
behind act three is we bet on categories
that have tailwinds and then we endeavor
to build the dominant player in that
category. Um my industry is an industry
of winner take all. Think McDonald's and
Burger King. Think Panera and Corner
Bakery, Chipotle, Quidoba. All of the
the value creation tends to um happen
for those that are building something of
large scale. and and and if you have
that that dominant position and you're a
better competitive alternative, you win.
And so we saw that opportunity in Cava.
And that's what led us to to make that
acquisition. And at that point, Cava
went almost overnight. So it took us 6
months to do the deal, but from 50
restaurants to 300. And it led to a
very, very tough 2019 because the
company wasn't prepared or ready for it.
And one of the things about ACT 3
Holdings, we're we're able I have um
seven or eight partners. Not one of them
is a financial guy. There's only one
financial guy in the mix who was
actually the activist who attacked me. I
couldn't tell anybody at the time that I
actually thought he was smart and liked
him. But at any rate, I did. And um he
joined us as our CFO. And you know I
have one partner that was the has been
with me for 20 odd years who does all
our deepest research and strategic
thinking. He was the guy who was really
helped me develop fast casual and that
ideology. I used to say from from his
brain to my lips I speak it but he was
the guy who really pushed me hard on on
thinking he's with us. I have another
partner who's opened 5,000 retail
locations. I have another partner who
came up through Darden was president of
Dairy Queen, the president of um Buger's
Bagels, uh was my COO is a guy who
really understands discipline scaling
and how you build these companies. We
took out a number of people from
Panera's technology function. The number
three guy who built all that technology
joined us and he brought a team with
him. We have the capability of really
doing technology. I have an another
partner who's a a serial entrepreneur,
great at food, great at design, great
with ideas. We get into a smaller
business. I mean, he's superb in helping
bring it all together. So, the model for
us in act three was one to to bet on on
a category and then have the ability to
go in and help them build the dominant
player in that category. And so at Cava,
we were able that that first year to
really provide a lot of technology
skills that were needed, help out in in
many ways as there wasn't a an effective
CFO till we brought that in and to
actually help in in multiple different
ways to help that business grow. And it
was a very tough year. I can remember
Brett, our CEO, we used to go to
breakfast every other week, walking back
from breakfast in downtown DC, and he
looked at me wisfully and said, "Ron, I
just wish we still had just our 50
stories, not these 300 that we bought."
And I looked at him and I go, "Brett,
you know, we don't have that choice
anymore. What we need to build is
loadbearing people and organization
around you that can take on this
opportunity. But if we can pull this
off, Katie bar the door, we're going to
build an amazing company in a powerful
category. And ultimately, Cava has been
probably the the single best IPO in the
last half decade in the restaurant
industry. How many restaurants are you
up to now?
>> About 400. But but more importantly, I
mean, it's perceived as a a brand who's
filling out a category Mediterranean and
dominating in that. And you know given
its market cap, market valuation which
has gyrated between 7 billion and 15
billion up and down um you know the
market perceives this as something very
real with the potential to fulfill its
destiny is the next Chipotle and that's
what they're paying for that potential.
Let's go back to the Obama Pow IPO just
for a second because I remember you
talking about how it changed everything
for you and you didn't anticipate having
all these new constituents or people
breathing down your neck and the the
short termism that sort of comes with
some partners I guess some capital
partners. I'd say differently. I did a
book called Know It Matters and I did a
chapter on the IPL. I'll warn you,
Shane. I've counseledled dozens of
people on going public who are going
public. And I typically start by telling
people 90% of the entrepreneurs that go
public live to regret it because it's a
very different enterprise. Now, for me,
it was phenomenal. I've done it multiple
times and you know, it's created great
blessings in my life in many ways, but
there are also difficulties that go with
it. And I can remember the day we went
public, my partner at that time, Lu
King, was was on cloud nine and um I had
him stop the the car we were in uh the
limousine and I got out and I walked
through Central Park down here in New
York and I started thinking to myself
just the sense of responsibility I felt
to all of these folks that were
investing tens hundreds of millions of
dollars in this company. And the reality
is when you're running an enterprise,
you have a responsibility. The people
that believe in you and you want to
deliver. I want to deliver for the
people who are buying the stock, not the
ones that are shorting the stock.
>> Yeah.
>> There were any number of those
investors. They all came from very
different places. Some were with us and
building something for the long term.
Others were were trading the stock for
the short term. And you had all of these
pressures. And it all played out in a
very public way. you had very limited
ability to protect whatever was going on
in your company and develop it and you
needed to be ready for prime time. And
so I I'll I'll tell you a story. When
when we decided to take Katha public, I
think people would consider it a very
successful IPO. Today, three and a half
times from the IPO price, but considered
very successful. What did we do? We
helped Brett and the team get ready for
an IPO for a year and a half before we
went public. We did quarterly earnings
calls in the company simulated with our
investors. You know, they had to do
press releases. They had to take
questions. We we we worked with great
diligence in getting their narrative
down
>> so that when they went out
>> they knew what they were selling and
they were selling to the street the
possibility of participating in the
growth of what would be the the dominant
player in Mediterranean. I think we
really prepared this company uh when we
actually went to market. We didn't let
the investment bankers control the
distribution. We did. We brought in
cornerstone investors like Tro who I had
a long-standing relationship with and
make had helped make billions of dollars
for them. We brought in um Capri the
capital group which again I had been
part of helping make billions of dollars
for them. We brought them in as early
investors. We limited the distribution.
None of us were selling stock on the
IPO. This wasn't an opportunity for any
of the existing investors or the or the
largest ones like me to get money out.
It was an opportunity to support and
fuel the company. And essentially, we
only allowed the investment banker 9% of
the shares in distribution, which
essentially went to their clients and
the hedge funds. We protected 91% of it
of that distribution so that it ended up
in the right hands. And I think that we
serve that company very well. Um, in
taking a long-term view of the IPO, the
end was to me, an IPO is a little like a
wedding celebration. It's the beginning
of the marriage. It's not the end. And,
you know, having been married, I I would
say to you, you want to really
contemplate that on your on your wedding
day. What What is it you're going to
have to do to have a successful wedding?
and um that celebration will will will
fall by the wayside. Um if you don't
>> do you think about control differently
now with all your experiences?
>> I'd answer it differently. You asked me
if I think about control. Look it one of
the lessons I've learned is to believe
in yourself. When I was growing up and
coming of age professionally, if you're
smart, you're always going to say that
guy's leaning on me about this or that.
What am I not getting? What should I do?
And one of the lessons I learned as I
look back is to trust myself that I
actually know what I'm doing
>> and I have to believe in it and I have
to have the faith to get through the
long march. I have to have the faith to
go through the pain of transformation.
One of the really interesting
retrospective lessons for me is to
actually trust myself.
And that has led to um to a a decision
that generally when we we we like to be
in a control situation in a company. By
that I mean that we're willing to bet
our own money. We're willing to bet on
ourselves. Myself and the act three
partners, but we don't want to be at the
effect of somebody else who has a
different idea. And and straight up when
you have investment partners, the best
way I can I can express it to you, it's
a little like having a baby with
someone. You take their money. You know,
they have they they have legitimate
rights.
>> And if you're the kind of person I am,
you want to listen and you want to be
responsive. And so I like generally
being in a control position because it
allows us to take a long-term approach
to do the things that that don't drive
profitability in the short term. but
actually build a far better company. You
know, there's there's one principle here
that we haven't talked about. And then I
want to talk about act three with you.
Everything I believe in about business
starts with three words, better
competitive alternative. The the world
doesn't need another business. It
certainly doesn't need another
restaurant. The whole objective of
everything we do is to build something
that for some target customer, this is
the best alternative they can find. And
what I mean by that, it sounds like
fancy MBA talk. It isn't. All it means
is that your target consumer is going to
walk past all of your competitors, all
the people doing something similar to
you, and choose to come to you because
you do it better than anybody else. If
you're able to do that, you can win. And
so I I I tell it by way of a story. I
was in um Vegas speaking I don't know a
couple of years ago and I walk through
the casino at 11:30 and I see folks
dumping chips into these slot machines
and I think to myself, Ron, the only way
I'd ever be in a casino at 11 p.m. is if
I own the casino and had the house vac.
It's the same exact thing
>> for me when I think about business. If I
don't have a better competitive
alternative, if I don't have the house
vig, this is an ugly business and I
don't want to be in it. What I've come
to know and what I'm trying to to make
sure your listeners hear loud and clear
is that what matters more than anything
else is genuinely having a concept, a
vehicle, a business that in whatever
your mini market is, the physical one
mile or the nation if it's real estate,
whatever it might be, that you're the
best alternative. When you have that,
then you have the possibility of growing
and building something. A scale.
>> Is that what you were trying to do with
the concept essence document is like
hash that out?
>> Totally. Concept essence was what we
started every business and every
business we're in today. And we should
talk about the the multiple businesses
we're in today. Every business that
we're in starts with a concept of
essence document. What is a concept of
essence document? It's essentially a
script for regional theater. Think of it
this way. If you're in a multi-unit
business, I'm running thousands of of of
regional theater shows that are
performing 18 hours a day. And so, what
is that script? What is the aesthetic of
the environment? What is the food and
the food attitude? Um, what is the
humanity? What are the people like? How
do you experience it from a consumer's
perspective when you walk in? and we try
to really go deep and use words that
mean something in writing that script or
that vision for how we're going to
compete and that becomes an organizing
tool. I mean just imagine at Panera we
had 125,000 people. How do you get them
all aligned with what we're trying to
create if you can't put it into words?
But you obsessed over this. So you spent
nine months working on this document
before you started and you were obsessed
about all the details and walk me
through that a little bit because
>> a lot of other people there's there's
sort of wisdom which is like go fast and
fail fast and this is sort of the
opposite of that. you took your time,
you were methodical, you were in the
weeds, you were watching people, but you
know, go fast and and fail makes sense
in technology where it's very much um
there there's no fixed cost and you can
repair completely. Um I'm in a business
I call it fashion with fixed assets. It
you know, you build a restaurant, you're
going to spend a million, a million and
a half, $2 million, maybe more. You
don't want to mess it up because fixing
it is really difficult. So you want to
get very clear what you're doing. What
do you do first, second, third, and make
sure you get it in the right order. So I
am much more concerned about getting it
right in a really serious way and
understanding it and then taking the
right steps from that than I am about
getting out there and getting market
share first because the cost of failure
is so high because the cost of failure
is extraordinary and often times once
you you bounce you can't come back and
remember we're talking about fixed
assets we're talking about you know
building restaurants. If I don't
understand what I'm doing, I'm going to
build it wrong. I'm going to fail.
>> How often do restaurants turn around
once they start losing sales?
>> Rarely.
It's really hard because organizations
by their nature don't like to change. In
fact, I I'll share with you something
I've I've I've written about. I call it
the life cycle of a business. It starts
with discovery and ends with delivery.
And think of it this way. When a
business starts out, it's so hard to get
off the ground and win. So hard.
Probabilities are very low. Um, you have
no capital, no scale, um, no competitive
advantage. You have the highest cost
you're ever going to have. And, and it
requires something that really is
powerful to break through with the
consumer to deal with all those forces
working against you. But some people do
and people discover a better way to
approach the customer that touch the
customer, a better experience and they
get off the ground and they start to
scale and it works and it's doing well
and it's getting bigger. Along comes
Outside Capital and Outside Capital
says, you know, we can help you grow
even further. And pretty soon you have a
board meeting of people saying, you
know, this business is doing great, but
but but you know what? It could do even
better if we bring in some of these,
I'll call them delivery people.
>> Delivery people are, you know, financial
planning and purchasing and a range of
different disciplines. And the truth of
the matter is, you bring in the delivery
people, it makes the place better. The
margins get better. The business gets
more disciplined. It gets tightened. But
here's what begins to happen. And not
over six months, but over years and and
half a decade, the delivery people and
the discovery people find they're
talking different languages. The
language of discovery is the language of
poetry. It's the language of imagine if
if only we could do this. The language
of of of discovery, of delivery, is the
language of prove it to me. Show me the
numbers. Let me see the spreadsheet. I
don't believe you. And quite frankly,
these these forces challenge each other.
But the language of uh but but delivery
because it does add value starts to push
out discovery because discovery doesn't
have oxygen if if if you got delivery
pushing down on it. And over time what
happens in so many food companies is
that that discovery is pushed out by
delivery. delivery gets stronger and
stronger and stronger and it becomes the
dominant force in the company.
>> And then these companies wake up after
15 or 20 years. They're billion-dollar
companies and they're really powerful
about delivering what was wanted and
needed by the consumer 5 years ago, 10
years ago and 20 and really terrible
about discovering what's going to be
needed and wanted for tomorrow. And so
one of the things that I've always
focused on is actually protecting
discovery and in fact as a CEO viewing
my role as discoverer and chief
innovator and chief because that will by
the very nature of centrifugal force um
and size and scale you will end up
decapitating discovery in these
companies. One of the things that I see
and anecdotally of course I'm not in
this space at all is there's a almost a
trend when you have a concept that's
sort of working and then you add on to
it and you keep adding and adding and I
always think well the backend operations
get a lot more complicated the
purchasing gets complicated the
inventory management gets more
complicated and then you look at
something like In-N-Out which has
basically a very simple menu privately
held
>> privately held incredibly successful.
How do you think through that? What's
your reaction to that?
>> Oh, my reaction to it is I I know the
the the polls. I've been there. The
world, look, it the world pays, the
marketplace pays for something that's
getting bigger, larger, better.
>> So, how do you do that? You you add
things, you improve things, you make it
better.
>> Uh we all want that. I mean, we're
susceptible susceptible to that by human
nature. And the unfortunate truth is
often times, many times, it doesn't make
it better. It actually just makes it
worse, more complicated. And so my view
is we don't want to do, we don't want to
be everything for everybody. We want to
be something special for somebody. And
that's the essence of what we mean when
we see we say being a better competitive
alternative to actually standing for
something and being something better.
How important is marketing now in terms
of getting traffic? And there's this
concept of viral marketing for
restaurants and people trying to break
through. I can see the eye roll.
>> Yeah, marketing is the wrong phrase in
my book. I think the right phrase is
amplification.
By amplification, I mean if I've got
something that actually touches people,
then I've got to let them know it's
available. But the idea that I'm going
to somehow come up with something cute
or better tactic or better technique
that may work in the in the very short
term, but it doesn't sustain a business.
And when you're building fixed assets as
we are,
you want something that sustains and
lasts for for years and and decades, you
want something that that built a
competitive moat uh and is a better
competitive alternative. So to me,
marketing is is
never the end. To be cuter or better is
never the end. The end is to actually
sustain is to build a better business
that's sustaining and powerful in its
own right and then figure out how to
make sure its target customers actually
know about it and it's on their short
list. Do you look at other restaurants
and uh think that oh I would do this
differently and they have a good concept
but they haven't quite nailed it and
maybe you can give me an example and
walk through one like True Food Kitchen
or something.
>> Well, first I I have a rule. I will not
talk about competitors because that
always gets me in trouble. But u I would
say this to you doing this as long as
I've done it. you know, I've done this
now uh over half a century and and I've
been in this industry
um and the collective
leadership of Vacry Holdings, my my
group, we probably got two or 300 years
of history. We there isn't a day that
goes by that we don't have on our
private chat some um interesting
commentary on on what folks are doing.
You can see these patterns over and over
and over again. What are the key metrics
you look at without mentioning any any
sort of particular competitor? If it's a
public company, what would be the two or
three variables and the financial
statements you look at? And if it's a
private company, how do you
>> to first the financial statements are
are a byproduct. They're not the end.
So, I'm often not looking at the
financial statements um as a leading
indicator. I'm looking at the financial
statements as the trailing indicator.
What we always start with at act three
is does that category
does it have tailwinds? Does it have
power? Is this a category that's getting
strong? Look at Mediterranean. It's the
number one diet in America. Every time
you go to the doctor or you read an
article, they're giving you a commercial
for our diet. Um it's bold flavors. It's
ambitious flavors. And yet it feels
safe. Um, you know, it's food that you
can eat, lamb and and chicken. Um, it's
it's it's it's cravable wellness. It's
healthy. Um, and yet it's it's it's also
tasty. That's a category that's got
power. Um, where we have another
business than plant forward. Uh, we call
it positive eating. 3% of American is
vegetarian, but 40% are eating um um
more plantforward. They want they want
that in their diets. Somebody's going to
win in that category. We intend to be
those people. You can think about bakery
cafes. I was part of building bakery
cafes in America between Old Bone Pen,
Panera. These were the dominant brands.
Well, I can tell you the future is in
upscale bakery cafes where you have real
chefs. Um where you have um food that's
worth going out of your way for because
it's part of the experience. Part of the
experience. And how important is that
experience? It's everything. You don't
just come for food. You come for the
totality of that experience, the people
that serve you, the environments that
you're in, how you feel when you're
there. Um, but but at any rate, so I I
just want to continue with this. We're
in immersive entertainment, powerful
category. Um, we're in in healthy eating
in Europe, another powerful category.
So, first at act three, we bet on the
category
>> and and I'm trying to take a a forward
look and say what's going to be the
categories that are going to be dominant
in five or 10 years. I don't want to be
fighting against headwinds. I want to be
sailing with tailwinds. That's number
one. Number two, I only want to invest
and I only want to play in that that
nexus of building the dominant player in
that category because the rewards fall
to those that are the dominant players
in these categories. Our goal is to
build it. And the truth is we have a
playbook. We know how to do it. U
between me and my partners, we have
built dozens of companies, any number of
successful ones, and we know what works.
And you know the the mantra here at Act
three is simply this. You know it's
tougher to build a nationally dominant
company than it is to climb Mount
Everest. Nobody goes up Mount Everest
without a guide because the the risk of
falling off the side is huge. Death,
right? Our challenge is why go up and
try to build a nationally dominant
company without somebody who's been
there before, has done that route three,
four, five times. And we basically
practice what we call sharpen
management. When we're in the boardroom,
we don't have financial people. We're
not ever worrying about the liquidity
event. We're in the business of building
companies, not selling them. And we're
not looking at the balance sheet. We're
not looking at the numbers so much as
really trying to help that management
team know what's going to hit them and
how to protect them. I I would say for
example we at ACT 3 believe that
financing which is pre which is at the
core of so many companies should not be
seen as a life cycle event. You know so
many companies are raising money in an
annual or or more frequent basis as if
you know it should be done every
birthday. Our view is running a company
is hard enough work without having to
continually be out there selling. And so
when we invest in a company, we're going
to put an investment in it. Um, and then
we're going to agree uh take a right of
first refusal on all follow on rounds of
capital at a pre-agreed to multiple. So
we're all in alignment. Um, it's an easy
thing. And the truth is we have yet to
ever turn down um a follow- on round of
capital other up to an IPO. And for our
for our companies, they've never ever
worried about capital. they call, pick
up the phone and and and we get there
because we're of them and we're with
them. And we recognize that capital
raising is not something they should be
doing, but rather they should be
worrying about building a better
competitive alternative. Similar kind of
thing with the many skills that my my
partners bring to it, whether whether it
be strategy, whether it be real estate,
whether it be technology, our guys are
available to the companies we invest in.
Again, we don't push it but on a cost
plus basis. And we want to protect our
management team to focus on building a
better company and not have to worry
about scaling up so many of these
different functions.
>> Well, let's talk about building a
company. One of the phrases that you use
over and over again is means and
byproduct. How does that factor into
building the company?
>> Well, I think it starts with life. So,
so much of what I've learned about
building companies starts with life,
Shane. I think in much of our society,
much of our lives, we've confused
byproducts with ends and means. Uh I
have a friend who's a type 1 diabetic.
His goal in life is to stay alive as
long as you and me. But that is not
something he can control. It's a
byproduct. What is it a byproduct of? Of
of a simple end. Keeping his blood sugar
between 80 and 180. When he does that,
the byproduct is life. What's his means?
diet, exercise, and insulin control.
It's literally the same thing in
business. Do I want value creation? You
better bet on it. But the way I get
value creation is by creating a better
competitive alternative, a place that
people want to come visit you in that
they're willing to walk past your
competitors to come to you. What's the
means? It's everything I do every day in
a business. It's how I spend my time.
It's focusing on the the aesthetics, the
operations, the structures, the
processes, um the way in which we engage
with our team members, the way in which
we engage with our customers. That's the
doing of the doing that drives the the
the end a better alternative that
actually creates the the the wherewithal
to have the byproduct. Only thing I can
tell you is those companies, those CEOs,
those leaders that focus on the on on
the byproduct, the outcome never get
there. It's rare because they they
actually miss the mark on what creates
it. You know, it's like saying, "I want
to be happy." You can't create
happiness. You can create the conditions
in your life that leads to a feeling of
happiness. And if I were talking to my
kids, I'd be telling them, "Do the
things that lead to your own
self-respect. Do the things that you
will respect." And if you in fact do
that as your end, your byproduct will be
that happiness.
>> Go deeper or spend a couple clicks maybe
on sort of how businesses go backwards
when they try to get the outcome instead
of the inputs, if you will. It's the
means versus the byproduct. So when you
focus on driving
the bottom line, you miss understand
that the most important thing is to
drive um the customer experience and the
the reason they want to come in. Um I I
give you an example. I was involved with
a company that will remain nameless.
They had a little ecoli scare. Their
immediate reaction was to cut labor. I
looked at him. I said, "You're you're
you're nuts. If you do that, you're
going to destroy what you've been
working on for for years, which is
telling your people that what matters
most is running great stores. In fact,
when you run any enterprise, what you do
is much more important than what you
say. And so, when you focus on very
short-term metrics, even though it seems
like a desirable thing, it actually
costs you far more in the long term. How
do you develop the long-term thinking
that you've brought to all these
different concepts from Obama to Panera
to Cabba? Just makes sense to me. I
mean, it just seems logical, right? Like
if I I want to start and figure out
where I'm trying to be in five years and
10 years and what's it going to take me
to get there? And that's what we mean by
futureback thinking. Um, and what seems
stupid to me is to do what's short-term
expedient and long-term stupid. I have
an expression. I'm I'm I'm long-term
greedy, not short-term stupid. And I I
really want to build something of value.
But the way you do that, whether you're
talking about a business or a
relationship or your own life, is to
focus on those things that have meaning
and self-respect and those things that
when you get down and get to the other
side of it will have touched other
people and most importantly touch
yourself. Spend a few clicks on that. Is
there an example that comes to mind in
the short termism versus long-termism?
And I love the idea of being long-term
greedy. I publicly spoken to this. You
can look at the difference between the
way Cavo went public and Sweet Green
went public. These were two companies
that emerged out of the the DC market
about the same time. One was out there
with a ton of press and a ton of builtup
expectations. Um that was Sweet Green.
Cava was slower, more disciplined. Um
you know I think Sweet Green uh went in
one direction with its real estate. Cava
stayed uh much more disciplined as it
went forward. Uh ultimately they both
went public. Um I think that in the
Sweet Green IPO we see a case where
a number of the investors sold fairly
quickly. uh was a different headset. Uh
let's get this thing off the ground. Um
you saw um a lot of of very instant um
gratification for some of the folks
involved in the IPO. I think you see in
Cava a very different approach. We took
a um a slower approach to that IPO, a
much more disciplined approach to it.
And I think we were much more
disciplined in the the consistency of
the brand and the brand integrity. Um
consequence as we call it. Um I think
that you see the byproduct of it. Um
today I I I would gather that Cava has
got a market cap five times what sweet
greens is worth something in that order.
four or five times depends on on you
know but it's stayed in that range and I
think that that value creation is a
byproduct of the very real decisions we
made in Cava about staying disciplined
staying focused on concept essence
building something that really delivered
for our team members first for our our
guests second and by doing that that our
investors would would end up doing well
and always taking the long-term approach
one thing that I don't think gets enough
attention and this is something I think
you're open to talking about is um the
difficulties of running a business, the
costs of running a business, the family
cost, the social costs, the talk to me
about that with Oban Pan in particular
and Panera and when you're doing
anything that's takes powerful
commitment that commitment owns you. You
don't own it. I I I've never owned a
business. The business is on me. It's
with me in the shower. It's with me on
vacation. Um, it's it's it's it's there
with me. And in fact, some of my best
work is done when I'm I'm I'm I'm on
vacation. I'm not actually thinking
about it in a conscious sense. And I
have the ability to extract and and
understand. But but listen, doing
anything in the world, whether it's
working out every morning, whether it's
being in a relationship, requires
commitment. And it requires a commitment
to the long term and it requires
responsibility. I would simply say I've
been committed to these businesses. I've
been committed to the people that have
believed in me. I've been committed to
my team members, to my investors, and I
want to give them something worthy. I
want to I want to build something of
quality. And there's a very real
personal price. I've been married twice.
Um it's not something I'm proud of. I
feel like uh it it it it's a failure. Is
that a failure because I was committed
to my business? I don't know. But I but
I sometimes I think about that. The
biggest fallacy of life is that you can
have everything and that all there are
are choices and that you you want to
make your choices with a clear head and
and your open eyes as to what you value,
what you respect and then you want to
build your life around that. Just as I
try to build a business around what it
is we try to what kinds of essence and
what we expect, I try to build my life
around what is it I'm going to respect.
And that's why I really try to think
through on a regular basis what is it I
need to do um for my own self-respect in
the context of my relationship with my
my body my relationship with my family
and and and
my my my spouse um my friends um my
relationship with my work and what does
it mean to do that well and ultimately a
relationship with my own spirituality
and my own um personal integrity. You
take all of that and you try to put that
together and you try to build a life
understanding
>> there is no balance. You can't have it
all. You've got to you make choices and
their trade-offs and you try to do that
as well as you can. I just encourage
your listeners to be clear what it is
that they want and what it is that
they're going to respect. What you don't
want to do is wake up one day and say,
"I wish I had and miss it." How
important do you think that focus was in
your success?
>> I'm pretty focused. And you know, I work
hard. I always have. I love it. I enjoy
it. I love when we figure things out. I
I like to think that I protected the
people around me
>> and that I'm but I I like to think I'm
willing to pay the price. And by that I
mean I'm willing to do what it takes to
do the hard work. Most people aren't
willing to pay that price and they don't
understand you're not going to get the
byproduct if you don't if you don't
build something that's a better
alternative and that's hard work. And I
I would share with you this too. Uh I'll
share with you two things. One I often
say to to entrepreneurs, I said it
yesterday. I was at a Tony Robbins event
and I said to the folks, I said,
"Listen, if you don't enjoy the people
in your business, the people in your
life, if you're, you know, you're if you
don't enjoy the doing of the doing,
you're never going to get there. If
you're doing this to make money, you're
never going to make money. If you're
doing this um for the for the glory of
it all, you're never going to get it.
The if you don't love the doing of it,
you're going to fail. And for me, it was
never about the end. It was about the
doing. I love the figuring it out. I
love the people that I work with. To
this day, I I'm not doing Act Three
because it's going to change my life or
my kids' lives in any way. I'm doing it
because I actually love
the process of having challenges and
figuring it out. So I I would say to you
and I say to people all the time, don't
do it for the for the outcomes. Do it
because you you actually love it. Um we
should talk about another concept about
entrepreneurship. I think it's often
misunderstood. Here's what entrepreneurs
do. This is what my business life's been
about. Entrepreneurs see a better
opportunity
>> and and they're not risktakers, they're
actually risk avoiders. They see that
opportunity, an opportunity to serve
somebody, to make a difference, to do a
job better for somebody. And in the
context of that, they're risk avoidant.
They don't want to take risks that get
in the way of their getting there. And
for me, when I can see a better way to
do something, when I can see a way to
make a difference in somebody's life,
um, be it a guest or even a a team
member, I want to do that with all the
energy I can. And I want to protect it.
And that to me is what an entrepreneur
is. It's somebody who sees opportunity
and then seizes that opportunity. I'll
share with you something else that I
think is important. You have to be both
strategic and detailed. So I I I can
operate at a a what are we trying to
accomplish in five years level? But
again, I can then get down into a
discussion on is that floor material um
working in a way that it's it's bouncing
sound around and the sound is the wrong
thing for the experience we imagine.
It's the totality of both sides of it in
these complex businesses that's
essential. Some people want to just be
strategic, others can't get out of the
detail. It's the ability for both. You
get a strategy from the detail and
frankly no strategy is worth anything if
it can't be executed. I find that
fascinating in particular the detail.
There's such an aversion uh from a lot
of people to get in the weeds of things
to understand things deeply and so
they're often reading information that's
filtered or synthesized
>> or wrong and it could be completely
wrong and they'd have no idea. Somebody
told me this and I don't know if it's
true or not and it's somewhat
provocative but you they said you can't
rely on uh somebody who doesn't know to
filter information for somebody who does
know and they used more provocative
terms than that but
>> I think there's some truth to that. I
think there Yeah. So, the ability to go
between these levels from high, you
know, 30,000 ft to the 1 in level and
anything in between is the sign of of
somebody who's really involved in in the
details getting firsthand information.
But I think that's what creates the
pattern recognition that you can see
when you spot these transformations that
we've talked about from Oban Pan to
Panera to, you know, Panera Act 2. And I
I think like if you're not in the weeds
on that stuff and you're not in the
details, you'll never be able to spot
that. Totally true. I think that you
can't have an effective strategy if it's
not informed by an understanding of what
actually is going to touch your customer
and how it's going to get executed. On
the other hand, the most powerful
strategy in the world means nothing if
it can't be executed. And so the ability
to understand how you're doing on both
levels simultaneously has been an
essential characteristic that served me
particularly well in my career.
>> Some people would call it obsessive. How
would you respond to that?
>> It's thoughtful as opposed to simply
obsessive. Being obsessive isn't enough
uh unless you're right. You know, being
right isn't enough unless you can get it
done. And I guess what I'm trying to
argue for is is not micromanaging, not
getting into the detail because that's
the only place you know how to operate,
but being able to use the detail to
extract and learn. Like I I'll tell you
a story, Shane. I I go to visit
restaurants we own all the time. I'm not
going to check out the people who work
there. They all think I am, but I'm not
going to catch somebody doing something
wrong. I'm actually going to check out
myself and our senior management and how
are we doing in projecting a vision of
how we compete and then delivering that
down through an organization and a group
of people to actually get it done.
>> That's a great way to look at it. I I
want to come to ACT 3 for a second here
and let's spend a few clicks on what
you're doing, what you're trying to do,
and why you're doing it. What we're
trying to do is build the next
generation of great companies. And we're
doing that based on an understanding
that building better competitive
alternatives is everything. And we want
to enable and help companies become the
best competitive alternative in
categories that have extraordinary
power. We have a couple of principles.
Number one, we believe in founder
friendly capital. So when we go in, we
hope it's the last uh investment capital
that gets taken before an IPO. Uh
generally we will um come in as common
stock not preferred same place as the as
the management team and we will uh
typically take a right of first refusal
on all follow on rounds of capital have
never turned it down and essentially
have enabled our founding teams to to
feel confident that they have unlimited
capital behind them. Secondly, we
practice what we call sharp um
management, not venture capital. When
we're in the boardroom, we're not
looking at the next liquidity event.
When we're in the boardroom, we're
actually in there helping solve real
problems. Typically, and most often,
we're saying you need to put more
overhead here, not there. What comes
first, second, and third. And each of my
partners are are serious um seauite
operations folks that have experience uh
in our 25 people. We have only one
that's really financially driven um or
thinks financially.
>> That was the activist investment.
>> That was the activist.
>> What's his name?
>> Noah El Bogen. Yeah. I had 300 people
chanting uh you know f you Noah. And uh
later I I I I ended up um respecting the
guy, but I couldn't tell anybody. I
liked him. I made an investment in a
hedge fund he had and ultimately asked
him to join me in this endeavor. But but
he says he's now a reformed activist. We
don't practice activism. We we help
people. And then obviously third, we
only at ACT 3 invest where we have
competitive advantage.
>> Um what does that mean? We invest where
we know something and we know how to
build dominant players in in in very
specific categories. Um we're now act
three as you know is the largest
independent investor in in in cavi serve
as the chairman there. Um we're also in
a company called Tate which is in Boston
and DC and now the New York market. It's
50 restaurants doing about $5 million a
unit. 250 million. It's a powerful cafe.
It's got a bakery there. It's got
artisan thirdwave coffee and it also has
authority with real chefs. It's a a
fascinating concept because it brings
the attitude and voice of the Levant the
Middle East. The founder woman named
Zidor Israeli powerful powerful chef and
and our our baked goods are really third
wave. They're differentiated. They're
worth actually eating.
>> Why New York? Isn't that like I I don't
know. I don't know the restaurant space,
but isn't that the most competitive
market in the
>> the single most competitive market?
We're not yet in. We'll be in New York
next year. We're in Ridgewood, New
Jersey. We're in We're going to
Scarsdale, Garden City, Summit, um
Milbour because we started in Boston. We
they built out substantially in Boston.
We went to DC. Did great in DC. New York
is in the middle of it. You're
absolutely right. New York City is about
as competitive a market as as ever. But
this is a concept that's good enough to
really compete. Is New York a good
barometer then? Like if it works in New
York?
>> It it's the funniest thing. People come
from Europe all the time. They all go to
New York. It's the worst market
>> because it's not the rest of the
country. It's not representative. I I'll
tell you a quick story and we'll go back
to the act three thing. Uh one of the
first discussions I remember having with
Brett Schulman, our CEO down at Cava. I
I said to him, Brett, right, you you
know, you and the Sweet Green guys, you
all went out, you know, you started in
DC and then you went out to LA as your
second market. I said, here's the deal.
I said, what really matters is not how
you do in LA, in Malibu, in West
Hollywood. What matters is how you do in
Fredericksburg, Virginia.
>> You you make it in Fredericksburg,
Virginia, you do two to three million a
unit. I'll show you a thousand locations
in America. That's the key. And and I
will tell you that if you're building a
business of mass scale, it isn't New
York City that matters. Um it isn't LA
that matters. It's everything in
between. And can you offer people
something of quality and substance? Uh
it's it's a different environment to
compete in. Um New York City costs are
three to four times higher. It's if
you're an you know if you're really
good, you can make it, but it's very
difficult.
>> Why did Oon Pen not work? You mentioned
that earlier when you went west. It
didn't work out there.
>> Didn't work in the malls.
>> It didn't work in suburbia.
>> So, it worked like downtown LA.
>> If there was a downtown LA, I mean, back
then there is today
>> it would it worked in a major office
building in downtown LA
>> because it was about high density urban
quick.
>> Yes.
>> Where people pay a premium for quality
and quickness.
>> Yeah.
>> It worked in Eden Center in you know in
Toronto kind of thing.
>> Right. Okay. So come back to the act
three.
>> So act three. So you you know we we
start with with tate. You know it's got
authority in bakery. It's got authority
in thirdwave coffee. It's got chefs in
every store. It's got real food. We're
doing breakfast. We're doing lunch.
We're doing gathering place. It's rooted
in this powerful aesthetic. Uh it's it's
it's it's they're beautiful. They're a
mix of antiques. That's twice. You've
mentioned the experience of having a
chef in the the actual unit as a
differentiator. So talk to me a little
bit more about that as a concept or how
it creates the experience.
>> And then we got to get back to act
three. But yes, every one of these
businesses are defined by their their
structure. Structure matters. For
example, I can't tell you how many
conversations over the years I had with
Howard Schultz about Starbucks and their
desire to do better food, dur food. But
they could never. Why couldn't they?
Because they have a frozen food system.
They manufacture in one place. They
freeze it. They ship it into the the
store and they defrost it. They spend a
hundred million dollars on an
acquisition, Bingerie, great little
bakery. Could they bring it to
Starbucks? No. Because the system
defines what they're capable of doing.
Similarly, at Panera, we were an
assembly business. We started as a
sandwich place. We put together
sandwiches. We didn't have real culinary
skills in the stores. Our ability was
was simply to assemble. So we were
limited. We took on Tate and I
originally bought Tate for Panera. I saw
it as a a better version of Panera in in
certain neighborhoods. I then converted
one of our stores in Harvard Square
actually. We popped the the sales volume
by more than twofold. Yeah, exactly. And
um you know materially changed the
Ebida. It left me in a place where I
said, "Wow, this is powerful." And when
I sold Panera, I negotiated the right to
take Panera's interest in Tate. At that
time, it was a dozen stores or whatever
to take that interest with me as part of
my um my package. And I ultimately did
take Taté with me. That's how it became
part of act three. Similarly, another
business, Life Alive. Um again, Plan
Forward, positive eating. Um I I love
this business. We've been in it eight
years. I can tell you that Plan Forward
is a is a tailwind that is powerful.
Somebody is going to win in it. We've
now produced stores in Boston and DC
producing very high volumes uh
surprisingly high volumes for positive
eating for this kind of food. Uh and and
a and a really powerful team and concept
and we have a a ton of of of excitement
in that. We have another company called
Level 99. Uh this is a guy who I was
introduced to um had an idea. He'd come
out of um MIT and and had been involved
in the um entertainment business for
many many years um uh engineer and he
had a vision for taking a space 40,000
square ft all kinds of different things.
We said to him, let's drop a
farm-to-table restaurant in the middle
of it, a brewery. We opened the first
one in in in NIT, Massachusetts at the
NITC mall. I have never been involved in
a business as powerful as this. Blew me
away. We've since opened in Providence,
Rhode Island. We're opening in Tyson's
Corner in DC in 4 weeks. We're opening
in Disney World down in um in Orlando in
the coming year. Uh it's going to be at
a location uh close to you anytime soon,
but uh sometime soon. But this is
another one of these powerful
businesses. Uh last year we made an
investment in a business in Barcelona,
Spain called Honest Greens. Again, very
high volumes. Um it's basically chefs in
every restaurant, real vegetables,
greens, um salmon, chicken put together
in a way that lots of of the young
Spaniards have found exciting. Uh that
business is now 30 odd restaurants in
Spain and Portugal on its way to the UK
and and and France next year. Again, we
think that there's a powerful
opportunity to bring some of these
disciplines to Europe, but to do it
right. Uh we also have another business
that we're involved in with act three
came out began in co but we have lots of
connections with institutional um
capital and the capital has asked us to
get involved in companies and typically
we can't with public companies we can't
uh take a carry we get paid so we we do
a deal with the company with the support
of their investors to take a percentage
of the company warrants so we have an
interest with a company called BJ's out
on the west coast where we provide some
strategic guidance. We have another
involvement with a company called Park
Technology
uh which is trying to really be the
source for um for unified commerce in
restaurants. You know, these are all
strong public companies where we've been
able to help them. And in the case of
BJ's, the stock is more than doubled
since we got involved. In the case of
PAR, it's held very strongly. And so,
again, what we really are in the
business of doing is doing what we love
to do, help figuring out where the
future is going to be, making sure we
arrive at that future before the rest of
the world gets there, figuring out what
those categories are, and then helping
wonderful management teams build the
dominant player in those categories.
And, you know, it started as a $200
million investment is now a nearly you
know I would it's a $2 billion portfolio
and um it's delivered 55% returns and
and mostly we're just having fun. I mean
we are not yeah we work hard but but it
isn't like running a company that the
the guys that are running the companies
are doing the heavy lifting and we're
there trying to make people think. I
love it. You know Shane we talked about
something before I just want to mention
I sit on any number of boards. I lead
the boards of most of these companies. I
was on the board at Whole Foods is when
we sold it to Amazon. To me, one of the
things that people misunderstand about
boards, the job of board is not to run a
company. Our job in act three is not to
run it. It's actually to ask good
questions that make the people that are
running it think. And that's where the
power comes. It's in the quality of the
question and the quality of how it helps
impact other people's brains that
actually matters. The discipline is not
in micromanagement. The details is not
in micromanagement. The detail is in
actually helping drive powerful and
profound understanding that allows you
to do a better job. I think that is an
incredibly profound misunderstanding
about boards and the value that people
bring especially when you're on the
board with a founder who's the CEO
instead of professional
>> we can take cava I think you know if
Brett Schulman who is the CEO were here
he would say our relationship has
evolved and grown over the six seven
years we've known each other I think
there were times along the way you know
that were really hard I think he's come
to know we are really on his side
>> were really with him. And I think he
would say the most powerful thing we
brought to him.
>> Um, and our relationship changed for the
better when basically my role has been
to challenge his thinking and let him
deal with the implications of it as
opposed to be directive.
>> Yeah.
>> And you know, he's grown immensely. He
started as my student and you know, I
learn from him all the time watching him
do it. But we share the same value
system. We share a a common thought
process about what's going to work. And
so the way you get there is through
taking the time to think about things in
a deep way. And again goes to my book
know what matters. Knowing what matters.
I think that the board in Cava which I
chair would say we understand uh our
role which is certainly to ensure
financial integrity to ensure um uh risk
assessment and and and and and to fill
that but most importantly we don't help
that company flying in on some basis and
telling them what to do. We help them by
bringing to to bear our experiences and
helping make them think in such a way
that they have a better sense of what's
going to hit them in the future and
they're prepared to handle that today.
>> This has been an incredible
conversation. We always end with the
same question which is what is success
for you?
>> Self-respect.
Ironically to me success is looking at
myself and knowing I have built the best
life that I know how to build. Whether
it be my role as a father, my
relationship with my kids, my role as a
a spouse and and in in relationships,
whether it be the kind of boss I've been
in the difference I've made in the lives
of people. Um very important to me the
lives I I've I've touched all over this
country and many parts of this world.
Guests who've come up to me and said,
"Thank you, you know, for what you did.
I I love being in your places, you know,
and and and and knowing I was the best
version of myself I could be. You know,
I'll say something to your toes. People
always say to me, "What's your legacy?"
Or somebody said to me yesterday at this
Tony Robbins event, you know, "What do
you want your legacy to be?" And I I
think about it and I realize there is no
legacy.
>> You know, you know, things go on, they
change. I don't think 50 years from now
people will be talking about me. I I I
think what my legacy is, frankly, what
matters most is my kids and the things I
show them that live on in their lives
and and in their hearts and in their
their souls and in their kids. And those
are the kinds of things that matter. And
as I look back at this my 71 years on
this earth, uh I just feel so blessed to
have had the chance to do work that I've
loved, to love, um to touch people, and
I hope in some small way I've done this
in a way that is worthy of all those
blessings.
>> I love that answer. Thank you so much
for the time today.
>> Good. This was fun.